33 books for you now, Mr. Francis.
33 books.
How is it that you keep managing to come up with so many, I don't know, one just has to try and think of something.
And when my wife and I, Felix, we went to Australia and New Zealand last October, November, and we came back via
Hollywood.
Spent a few days there at the Universal Studios and they were wonderful to us.
Hoping to get perhaps some of my books on the films but nothing's happened yet but anyhow I thought there was an idea for the next story.
I was thinking about an American film company coming over to England to make a racing film.
The book just proved all right, I think.
But, so therefore, you have a very agreeable muse.
I mean, everything is grist for the mill, I guess.
That way, then.
Oh, yeah.
Yeah.
Well, every story I write, I research the subject.
And my wife helps.
She loves researching these subjects, too.
And, uh,
They've proved beneficial so far.
Have you ever thought of not doing anything with horses?
I suggested it to Mrs. Michael Joseph, who is now dead, about 16 or 17 years ago.
She said, if I write a book that hasn't got horses or racing in it, will you publish it?
And she said, after a while, she said, yes, we'll publish anything you write.
We'd rather you live and do so.
Your readers would be disappointed if they weren't learning.
something about the racing scene and uh i i join the racing scene to something else such as pharmacology or merchant banking or photography or computers you know and you know it's nice to do well my wife and i have done research on wines and spirits for about 48 years
And I've brought that into proof.
So it goes on.
Now, you don't have a continuing character.
No, I've repeated two characters twice.
But I don't like that.
I don't consider myself a born novelist, you might say.
And I find introducing a character and talking about its characteristics.
throughout the story, hosting is all the book out.
So, therefore, it's... You find it a lot easier to create a new character, I mean, a protagonist every time of... Yes, because if you've had one continuing character, like, you know, whoever, I mean, you pretty much have to remember what you've done in the 23 previous installments, I guess.
But that's very interesting, I guess, where you are writing...
in the genre, I guess.
Would you consider yourself a genre writer?
It's a word I don't like, but I suppose I am, yes.
Lots of people say I'm a mystery writer and a crime writer.
I belong to the mystery writers of America.
I belong to the crime writers of England.
I consider myself more an adventure story writer.
I'd like to bring in some of the experiences I've had into the stories and adventures such as in Norway, in the sea, North Sea oil and smokescreen.
That's brought in quite a lot about the Kruger Park Game Reserve in South Africa where my wife and I went for
a long weekend.
I went out to judge at the International Horse Show Johannesburg and one of the carrots dangled in front of me was, oh, we'll give you a weekend at the Cougar Park game reserve.
So I went and it was very interesting.
I brought that into smokescreen.
Do you still enjoy horse racing?
I do, yes.
I enjoy people chasing.
I don't
enjoy flat racing all that much.
One likes, I like to go to a place like Royal Ascot where there are four days.
Where is this again?
Royal Ascot, Royal Ascot.
There are four wonderful days racing.
There are six races each day and they're all superb top-class races.
I don't care if I don't see the races, but I like to see the horses parading in the parade ring.
How about the people that they attract?
A lot of people go there for the fashion and the social scene.
But there are people who, equestrian people who know what about horses go.
Now, of course, you said you're not a born novelist.
I don't know if there's any such thing as a born novelist.
Probably not.
But you're never really trained to be or even conceived of being a professional writer.
You were a jockey, right?
Yes, I was.
When I was young, I didn't do a lot of reading.
During the winter, the fox hunting was in our area.
And Mondays and Fridays were always days when they weren't very far away.
And I went to day school.
I didn't go away to boarding school.
And Monday mornings and Friday mornings, I used to come down before breakfast.
Can I go hunting, Dad?
And more often than not, he'd say, push, cowboy.
And then he and Mother would have great arguments.
She said, you've got to go to school to learn.
She taught me a lot by making...
I rode ponies for a lot of people in the show ring and won prizes.
I suppose I was quite good at it.
And I won a lot of prizes and they'd give you presents.
Your cufflinks and your watches and things like that.
And my mother insisted that as soon as I received the present I sat down and wrote a letter to these people.
And it had to be...
A proper letter, you know, no mistakes.
One particular letter I wrote to Lord Camoy's daughter, the Honorable Noreen Stoner.
She gave me some lovely gold cufflinks.
And I wrote three letters, and Mother read them.
No, no, there's something wrong again, so I had to write another one, four, and I wrote five, and
mother's read it and she said well i think that's all right you can go to bed now and she said just let me look at that once more so i thought just she looked at it and all the others i'd been writing dear miss stoner well this one i've got dear stoner so she said you go to bed and write it in the morning but funny enough
About five or six years ago, I met this Mrs. Stoner that was.
I met her in Florida, and I told her about this.
She's now Mrs. Drexel.
She comes from Rhode Island.
She was so amused about it.
Let's see, you had a couple of bad falls, right?
I mean, I guess it was kind of... Well, you get quite a few falls.
It was almost a near catastrophe that actually moved you into the riding game.
Is that right?
Well, that wasn't really a fall.
That was when the horse collapsed for me in the Grand National, the Queen Mother's horse.
You were actually leading the race, isn't that right?
I was about 10 minutes in front.
It was 25 yards to go.
And it was the Queen Mother's horse?
The Queen Mother's horse.
What was the name of the horse?
Devon Lock.
E-V-O-N-L-O-C-H.
And he was winning it easily.
And it was before the days that the races were televised.
And there were a quarter of a million people at Aintree that day all around the course.
It was a two-mile circuit, you see.
And you go twice this round, four and a half miles.
That's a long race.
It is.
It's the longest.
It happens every year.
It's a great race.
And what's the name of the race again?
Grand National.
Oh, that's famous.
And what was that held?
Aintree.
Aintree
Well, when I first rode a fancied one for the Queen Mother, the trainer told me, he said, I think you'll win this stick.
He said, jump the last up sides with the others and make a better way home to the finishing post.
Well, I did this, and about halfway up the straight, I thought I was winning quite easily.
I could hear noises shouting, which you don't hear, do you see?
And I thought, my God, I'm being tackled.
So I sat down and rode.
I didn't look around.
It's a bad thing to look.
So I got past the winning post in front, and then I stood up and looked around.
There was nothing within spitting distance of me.
It was one of Her Majesty's early winners, and he was given a great reception.
And this happened a number of times over the next two or three years.
I got used to it.
But this day in the Grand Nationals, she'd never had a runner in the National before, and there hadn't been a runner, a royal runner in the National since about 1900.
And as I jumped the last fence, just in front of the eventual winner, I could hear this crescendo of cheering building up.
Then I just sat down and rode to the winning post.
And 25 yards before you get to the winning post, you gallop past the water jump, which you jump on the first circuit.
The second circuit, you gallop past it to the winning post.
And I've looked at the film, newsreel film, time and time again, and you see Devon Locke sort of pricking his ears just as he's approaching this water jump.
And as he pricks his ears, the noise hits him.
Christ, what's happening?
Sure.
Time quarters refuse to act.
He went down, slid along on his belly, brought his four feet up to stop him going over, slid along on his belly.
How I didn't fall off him, I don't know, but he got to his feet again.
If I could have got him going then, I was still far enough in front to have won.
So he didn't have to be destroyed or anything?
Oh, no, no, no.
He was quite all right.
He pulled all the muscles in his hindquarters, but I couldn't get him going again.
I just had to get off and walk away with a lad.
How far were you from the finish line?
I was about 25 yards.
From the finish line?
From the finish line.
Has the Queen Mother ever won a Grand National?
No.
So that was probably your best shot.
Yes, that was the best shot.
But she and the Queen and Princess Margaret were all there, and I had to go and see them afterwards, and they were as dumbfounded as I was.
What do you say?
I mean, were they sporting about it at least?
I told them what I thought and what a great ride I'd had until this spot.
The Queen Mother was very philosophical.
She said, well, that's racing, isn't it?
So did this in any way influence your becoming in the game?
Well, the horse, he didn't run for six months following that.
He won his next race.
He won two more races.
Really?
He won two more races for me.
And then he, I was laid up in the beginning of 1957 and he ran in a race and his tendon went with another jockey and he was retired from that time on.
And he lived, he lived for another
five years.
Was he a pretty good stud for us?
No, he was no good stud because he was a gelding.
Most steeplechasers are gelding.
Not all of them, but most steeplechasers are gelding.
And tires, stallions, they don't prove to be good steeplechasers.
They hate
jumping over a fence and dragging their private parts over the fence.
But that's why there are very few pool sleepers areas.
And about three months after this episode, my author's agent, John Johnson, he got an introduction to me.
His mother knew my mother.
He said, why didn't I write my autobiography?
You were about thirty-four at this time, I guess.
Well, I was thirty-six.
Thirty-six.
It was old for a secret church job, because that's about the time when I do give up.
Anyhow, I didn't think I could, but he said, go on, you try it.
And my wife said, go on, you're always writing long letters to people.
I'll help with the spelling and English.
So I sat down and wrote The Sport of Kings, my autobiography.
And I'd done about half of it by January 1957.
And I had a nasty fall then, and it was sort of my final fall.
I was very well advised.
I was leading the jockey's table, and my advisor said, if you're going to get out, now's the time until you're at the top of the tree and get all sorts of things off of you.
Well, I got out, and it was news.
All the media wanted...
wanted interviews was i going to trade yeah i was champion jockey you see and it was news and uh i said all right half written my autobiography i'll see what develops well the sports editor of the london sunday express he must have read these reports to the telephone and asked would i lunch with him one day so i had lunch in london and he said uh
It seems you can write a little bit.
Will you write half a dozen articles for my newspaper on the current racing scene?
Well, I'd done three, and they wanted me to become a full-time newspaper man.
I wouldn't become a full-time, I didn't think I was, until the following November, November 1957.
I signed on the dotted line then.
I did it for 16 years.
I missed people after 16 years.
That's amazing.
And it was a good job, and it kept me in the racing world.
It brings you up to your 50s then.
Well, yes, but after about four years, my wife said to me, she said, you always said you're going to write a novel.
She said, now's the time.
The car's beginning to knock, and we've got two sons to educate.
The carpets were wearing out, so I sat down late 1960s, 61, and wrote my first novel, Dead Sirt.
And Michael Joseph, who had published The Sport of Queens, they'd done it very well.
One of the conditions of publication was if I wrote anything else, they must have first refusal.
So my agent took the manuscript of Dead Surfer and Long Film, and they said they'd publish it straight away.
And they published it in the spring of 1962, and there's been one every year ever since.
So you were out there with Ian Fleming at the same time, I guess, right?
Yes, yes.
I hadn't got a James Bond, but I had a different character at the time.
I didn't know...
I knew his brother and sister very well.
We used to spend a lot of time together.
So it's been a pretty good ride for you, hasn't it?
Oh, it hasn't been bad.
It's not nearly so thrilling as riding racing.
That is terrific.
You win a race and people pat you on your back and say, well done, Dick.
Immediate satisfaction is terrific.
But the long-lasting satisfaction comes from the books because...
When you win this race, half an hour after, you go out and you go end over end, and all your patting on the back is gone.
But people read the books the years afterwards.
Does it surprise you, your success?
It does, very much.
Every time, right?
Every time.
I try nowadays, for some years now, I try to improve with everyone.
I try to make them a little better time.
Do you go back and read them at all?
When I'm thinking of a story or thinking of passages of a story, have I used that in such and such a book?
I will go back and read bits of them.
I don't say I'm going to read them all.
But you want to make sure you're not repeating yourself.
Yes.
And how about your fans?
Have your fans ever catch you on things?
No, I'm glad to say they haven't.
Do you hear from horsemen?
I hear from hundreds of people.
And I have a set letter which I write.
It has to be done.
But I hear from children who are 12 and 13 and people who are 90 in every walk of life.
It's amazing.
And it's lovely to hear from the children because I encourage them to read more.
And if you get them at that age, you've got them for life.
Do you think course racing is...
I mean, I know it's not as popular today as it used to be, and I don't know what the reason is.
It is as popular in the United Kingdom, yeah.
And there is more racing now.
There's much more racing.
When I was a champion jockey, I won 76 races in one season.
Wow.
But the champion jockeys now are winning over 200 races, jumping races.
South race jockeys used to win over 100.
Jordan Richards, he holds the record.
He rode 259 in one season.
The flat race juffies over here win many more than that, too.
The jumper stems.
When I say, over here, where am I?
I'm in America.
I can't remember where I come from.
Of course, here, horse racing is so closely identified as gambling.
Yes.
And so there are so many other interests now that people are gambling on.
I mean, it's a shame in every way the Indians are becoming...
You know, the modern dean of the Arabs.
Well, they're including that big national lotteries in Britain, and it hasn't started yet, but I think the racing people are wondering what is going to happen.
But lots of people, including myself, go to big race meetings, and I never look at the gambling and never worry about it at all.
I like to see the action and see what the modern-day jockeys are riding like.
I know you've got a signing at 1230.
Yes, I have.
Listen, would you sign it for when?